[Music]
welcome to what is going on truth in
Medicine Show
each month broadcaster author and media
consultant sandy sedge beer and
naturopathic medical doctor researcher
and global health educator dr. Denise
Wharton bring you the latest news and
research from leading edge science and
new integrative medicine to help you
outsmart cancer chronic disease aging
and more here's your hosts
dr. Denise warden and Sandy sedge beer
hello and welcome back to the truth in
medicine show it isn't often that you
come across a book about science and
medicine that reads like a thriller full
of revelations and cover-ups amazing
highs and heartbreaking lows blind
alleys and striking moments of discovery
and a truly exciting ending but
tonight's guest
science researcher and author Travis
Kristofferson has pulled it off yes he
has sandy and I tell our listeners a
little bit about Travis he is a graduate
of the Montana State Honors Program and
molecular biology and his graduate
research in bio remediation in cancer
theory culminated in a master's degree
in material engineering and science and
as that science writer and author his
groundbreaking book tripping over the
truth the metabolic theory of cancer
boldly challenges our current
understanding and treatment and
mankind's most feared disease and when I
read Travis's both years ago I was
immediately lecturing at a medical
conference I think it was in Reno Nevada
and I saw that he was attending the
conference and I had my groups that had
brought me to that conference say you go
find Travis Kristofferson so I can meet
him since then I've come to know
Travis's intellect his integrity and we
even have some collaborations now in
helping cancer patients welcome Travis
thank you it's great to be here Travis
you book tripping over the truth I mean
it challenges
everything that we thought we knew about
the disease and it suggested that the
reason for the failed war against cancer
stems from a flawed paradigm that
categorizes cancer as an exclusively
genetic disease so tell us how is it
possible that we could have
mischaracterized the true nature of
cancer that's a great great broad
question to jump into it and you know I
think those things sandy when you look
just a bit the way history unfolds
especially science right it's it's a
very sort of sweeping broad long term
thing where there there's no like sudden
epiphany moment where we say oh we got
this wrong it takes generations where
they where they the evidence accumulates
there's very rarely a very good
consensus in biology you know you can
have a hundred studies on the same
phenomenon and say 85% well allude to
one sort of mechanism and the other 15%
will allude to a different one so it's a
sort of we look at a preponderance of
evidence over time and cancer is not you
know we're not looking at a simple
mechanism here we're looking at a
narrative this disease is so complex
that it's you know it takes evidence
from multiple angles over over lifetimes
basically before we get a good you know
the the true story of what's going on in
there and that's still unfolding and so
the book that I that I wrote was about
these scientists have chipped away at
the predominant theory the predominant
theory is is the gene theory that you
alluded to called the somatic mutation
theory and that's been around with us
you know it's sort of built up during
the 20th century but really got
established in the mid 70s and nobody
has really ever since looked back it's
been very a very dogmatic theory that
nobody questioned from that point on but
these sort of select groups of
scientists have have been chipping away
at this new image of cancer that that
says that you know it's not a genetic
disease that it could be a exclusive
metabolic disease in origin and that was
what my book was a
and it's it's you know it's got that
sort of scientific kind of investigative
mystery story quality because it's still
unfolding and they're still you know
this controversy going on but I think
that it's coming to a point where
there's enough luminaries in the field
that are questioning the gene theory
that I think it's at a tipping point now
I think it was interesting Travis that
when I was lecturing at society for
integrative oncology this year I was
sitting next to after my lecture I'm
sitting next to a an oncologist one of
the major institutions and I said
something about the metabolic theory of
cancer and she said what is that and I
explained it to her which I want you to
explain to our listeners and she said
well that makes perfect sense why have I
not heard of this so that's why we're
doing all these shows and that's why
we're doing everything that we are doing
but let's let you tell the listeners
what do we mean when we say it's a
metabolic disease right yeah so I guess
the good way to start with the contrast
with with what the disease is
characterized as now which is a genetic
disease and that says that over time
you'll receive key mutations to your
your genes in your nuclear DNA that are
that are responsible for controlling
cell division or the cell cycle we call
them these are called oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes and when you get
this right combination of what we call
driving genes and then tumor suppressor
genes which are the brakes to cell
division then you could kick off this
process called neoplasm or cancer and
the cells begin dividing pathologically
invading you know going through
membranes invading other other tissues
and organs that's the way it's been
viewed for the last 50 years the
metabolic theory is actually a very old
theory that was first proposed by Otto
Warburg a German biochemist in 1924 in
it states that the key trigger to cancer
is not genetic mutations but well damage
to the respiratory system of the cell in
other words the energy system and we
ourselves make energy in these little
organelles called mitochondria so he
stated that the prime cause of cancer
was damage
to the mitochondria which then
transforms the metabolic environment of
the cell which switches it over from
from oxidative metabolism which is
energy creation using Oscars oxygen
which all your normal healthy cells do
to this kind of ferment of metabolism
which uses blood sugar and that kicks
out a waste product called lactic acid
so he noticed that first in 1924 that
cancer cells are in the presence of
oxygen
we're kicking out lactic acid and doing
this weird fermentated metabolism and
then he went on to say that this was the
prime origin of cancer now he just
didn't have his career didn't span
enough technological advancements where
he could really characterize this
further and that's where it kind of got
he was this brilliant scientist won the
Nobel Prize but at the end of his
lifetime he was sort of ridiculed for
this you know overly simplistic view of
what cancer was as the genes theory kind
of swept swept and in the favor but then
it didn't didn't go away
he kind of smoldered along in this
brilliant biochemist at johns hopkins
named Peter Peterson really picked up
Warburg's torch and continued to
characterize this metabolic defect
within the cancer cell these damaged
mitochondria and all the consequences
and then the one that really picked up
the torch from there was Thomas Savery
to Boston College and he's sort of the
you know the Godfather of this metabolic
theory of cancer and it's you know most
current incarnation but the I mean these
guys have been correct me if I'm wrong
you know they've been pretty much
working on the sidelines I mean the
establishment hasn't given it a great
deal of credence until fairly recently
no it hasn't and in you know the way the
establishment works is we have to you
have to establish something through it
through it you know for anything to
change in standard of care it's got to
go through these long owners clinical
trials so it's going to take decades
it's got to go through phase 1 phase 2
phase 3 you know in metabolic therapies
by nature are combinational so it takes
dietary stuff it takes certain
combinations of drugs perhaps hyperbaric
oxygen so the clinical trials are very
difficult to perform and they're going
to
a long time the paradigm you know the
way we the treatments we use now
typically chemo and radiation have been
around for so long they're just not
going to change overnight that the whole
system is set up to maintain that kind
of you know standard to care that we
have right now and we wouldn't expect it
to we have to have that burden of proof
to prove that it works first but there's
pockets where people are doing these and
the outcomes you know so far have been
have been I sort of eye-popping there's
a group in Turkey that really latched on
to Tom Safe Routes work early on and
what they do is they give the lowest
dose range of chemotherapy that they can
get away with lawfully and in in in the
country so there's a certain dose range
of chemo that they have to use they use
a very lowest dose that they can and and
and you know to step back one second
this whole idea of metabolic therapy is
that we the way we treat cancer now is
extraordinarily caustic inflammatory
right we do these needle biopsies we
radiate we give chemotherapy all these
things are toxic they're inflammatory we
don't consider that and the basic
biology of the cancer cell is this is
what's driving the diseases inflammatory
process and kind of an interest story
and interesting clinical - it's a
retrospective trial to sort of allude to
this as this grad student looked at the
data on women that had breast cancer and
you noticed that after surgery there's a
certain percentage of recurrence right
and what happens when you do surgery is
you create a wound and so the immune
system goes to that point to the wound
the platelets release all these growth
factors and that's what causes that's
what drives cancer so that he noticed
that these the women that got just a $10
shot of this non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory compound during the
surgery it's called Carol AK looked at
their data and they had a 75% reduction
in recurrence after surgery so that's a
huge number that's from a ten-dollar
anti-inflammatory shot so the basic
biology is a simple you're preventing
that inflammatory wound process at least
you know a small amount and the
consequences that's profound so the idea
behind these metabolic therapies is you
want to want to just tone down
everything that inflammatory process
all those things that we're doing that
causes that and so that's what they're
doing in Turkey they lowest dose of
chemo they put patients on ketogenic
diets they use combinations of drugs at
the further low lower blood glucose
drive down inflammation hyperbaric
oxygen and then they publish their
outcomes compared to historical survival
and it's you know it should make
everybody notice because their outcomes
are fantastic well Travis still tell us
too though I mean you know you and I are
collaborating next week on a big center
and a research center and you've got
some things going with the group of care
oncology where we are starting to
collaborate with some of the traditional
oncologists with some of these therapies
in this country would you want to touch
on that a little bit about what you have
going in California is that public
knowledge yet yeah well I'm part of care
oncology which is yeah it's a group that
actually got started to UK and they're
there again the part of the seek
pharmaceutical group and they're another
group of guys have really got turned on
to Tom Safe Routes metabolic Theory
cancer and looked at it from that angle
and what treatments were available to us
right now that you know that addressed
that and could be used to junk tably not
not to compete with standard of care but
we could help enhance it and they they
developed this combination of for common
medications repurposed drugs that sort
of you know act under these metabolic
pathways and started treating patients
back about five years ago and the idea
was to collect clinical data as we went
along and they have a it's been
submitted to a journal right now that
the trial on GBM glioblastoma when you
add these four drugs to standard to care
you see a doubling and overall survival
just from four simple common drugs that
affect you know metabolic processes so
I'm involved yeah for our listeners
glioblastoma is one of the fastest
growing you know horrible tumors that
you can get it is a brain cancer so when
you can make a change in that that's a
big deal it's a monster it's the one
that took John McCain yes right yeah in
the way we treat it now you know it's
amazing it hasn't changed for so long
teemo's Olamide it's a it's a common
chemotherapy and then radiation and
surgery you know it's all these same the
same sort of paradigm that hopefully we
can kind of step away from but how far
are we away from stepping away from that
unfortunately a probably a long time
sandy because we have to perform those
you know this is the trial that has to
be done is you have to do standard of
care and then you have to do standard to
care with metabolic therapies and then
the dream trials to have metabolic
therapies on their own and compare them
head-to-head with those with those other
ones and then once you do that and a
large trial and you can prove it
definitively then you know the paradigm
will change so what what is that in
terms of years Travis oh you know we
like dr. Ward and I are doing our best
optimistically it could be because GBM
is such a fast-moving cancer you know
you could perform that trial relatively
quickly but it just it takes so much
money and then organizing with you know
the centers and all that it takes
somebody with a lot of money in the
right motivation but for our listeners
to know though I mean that we're talking
about leaving the amount of the paradigm
to change but these therapies are
available now both Travis and I you know
we have resource consultations we have
patients that come in we can say you can
work with your traditional oncologist or
if they've been given up by the
traditional oncology and they say we're
done we can help guide them some of
these therapies are things that patients
are doing now my patients you know we in
and Travis's that we can see the tumors
shrinking we see clinically these things
working so it's not that we have to wait
until the paradigm changes we have
clinical trials that they can that they
can go into and that they can even start
some of these therapies no matter what
else that they are doing the ketogenic
diet hyperbaric the things that we're
talking about so the good news is that
we are guiding patients right now and
the other good news is that in standard
of care that means you know the moving
that paradigm
most of the time once you have proven
the efficacy and the safety of something
it's still a minimum of 11 years after
you prove it before it becomes standard
of care and we're not waiting we're not
we're not waiting
we haven't waited we're utilizing things
that are helping patients right now and
we're not waiting that 11 years we do
want to go and change the paradigm
that's why we're doing the work that
we're doing to be able to everyone
standard of care will change but in the
meantime we are helping now yeah you see
that dr. Burton don't you you see the
patients had adopt these therapies and
do them well and maintain you know a
good attitude they just they just do
better it's so apparent to us our second
patient is one of those patients with
them a glioblastoma and and she's done
all the things just fantastically well
it's 16 months with no evidence of a
reoccurrence right and that's unheard of
tell them what's the normal vote normal
yeah recurrence typically occurs six to
eight months after right diagnosis yeah
well I had a question about that we'll
come back to after the break you're
listening to what is going on was truth
in medicine show and tonight dr. Wharton
and I are talking to science writer
Travis Kristofferson about his riveting
book tripping over the truth the
metabolic theory of cancer which boldly
challenges our current understanding and
treatment of cancer we'll be back with
more after this break
[Music]
the future of internet radio is here
times radio
I am FM change and growth are part of
natural life and also part of your
spiritual life everyone needs support
and guidance especially during life
passages upgrade yourself with the
ometimes experts program with all times
experts you have access to the best
intuitive coaches spiritual teachers
counselors astrologists and Oracle's our
team was carefully selected so you can
trust find out more at experts old times
calm more than 24 million Americans have
an autoimmune disorder and that number
continues to grow I'm Sharon Saylor and
I'm one of those twenty-four million to
put that number in perspective cancer
affects about 9 million and heart
disease up to 22 million that's why I've
brought together top experts and those
thriving regardless of their diagnosis
to bring you the latest most up-to-date
information join me Sharon Saylor Friday
night 7 p.m. Eastern for the autoimmune
error on Life interrupted radio to find
out how to live your life uninterrupted
some knowledge belongs to us and s alone
the way our girlfriends walk talk touch
the air details that only
sister can know about her girls what
about other girls the ones we carry with
us every day our bond with our sister
girls gives life the knowing of breast
can save it go to know your girls that
board for the facts you need on breast
health
brought to you by Susan G Komen and the
Ad Council welcome back I have a
question for you both leading on from
where we left off before the break you
were talking about the work that you're
doing and that people can have access
you know just some of this now into
clinical trials but you know is
insurance covering it is this only for
people who can afford special treatment
or to be able to go to you know travel
around to certain clinics where it's
available you know the good thing about
these sandy number one if you're
relatively well versed curious you don't
have the time ketogenic diets you know
you can learn a lot on your own it's a
diet to do it really really well though
it is a tricky diet and it helps to have
you know obviously coaching and there's
people that do that and it's not
terribly onerous ly expensive and in the
metabolic therapies you know the
medications that we're talking about are
generics so they're they're literally
the ones we use they're about $60 per
month so it's kind of fortuitous that
the first sort of wave of these you know
treating cancer that metabolically it's
just it's you know it's very cheap and
reasonable and so it's accessible to
everybody
typically off-label stuff like that is
not covered by insurance sometimes a few
things can be but for the most part it's
not so you know I mean it's interesting
that ketogenic diet has become really
big and not just relating to cancer you
know everybody seems to be on it and
it's supposed to be great for one's
general health and you know for losing
weight so many people want to lose
weight but how does it actually work
with cancer hmm so the ketogenic diet
interestingly was the standard of care
therapy for apple childhood epilepsy in
the 20s and and then the the anti
epileptic drugs came out and it just got
completely forgotten and then it got
sort of revived by now I'm drawing a
blank on his name dr. Freeman at Johns
Hopkins and he was doing it just you
know treating patients kind of quietly
on his own and getting these enduring
remissions when they were we're
responding to medications what really
brought it in the spotlight then is when
Jim Abraham's the movie director when
his son got it charlie and he took it to
Johns Hopkins and he'd been through
dozens of drugs and was you know rapidly
declining they put him on the ketogenic
diet and he immediately stopped having
seizures and Jim was so befuddled and
confused and angry by this that he made
the movie first do no harm with Meryl
Streep just to sort of make this you
know public knowledge no how could this
therapy that's basically free that
anybody could have access to it was not
known you know he found it in the in the
back pages of a textbook he just
happened to grab when he was in the
library desperately looking for anything
to help his kid so it's been around and
it's been known for a long time the way
it works with epilepsy we really don't
know we don't know if it's ketones we
don't know if it's so this caloric
restriction process what it is it's just
sort of miraculous it does something the
neuro chemistry that just works as far
as cancer goes it's really a sort of
easy to explain elegant you know sort of
theoretical mechanism when you go into
ketosis you shift your sort of general
metabolism from burning carbohydrates
and blood sugar to burning ketone bodies
and cancer cells like I said earlier
step shift into this ferment of
metabolism where they burn blood sugar
and kick out lactic acid and the reason
they do that is because their
mitochondria are supposedly damaged
compared as Thomas Avery says ketone
bodies can only be burned and intact
mitochondria so the healthy cells can
transition to ketone bodies and the
cancer cells can't all of a sudden
they're presented with this fuel that
they
and burn so it makes this sort of you
know this beautiful therapeutic
differential that we always look for
we're healthy cells are made more robust
and healthier and cancer cells are made
weakened and made more vulnerable and
then you come in with what we call these
polls strategies like hyperbaric oxygen
is something that that can kill that you
know it can further wound the cancer
cells and you get this sort of enhanced
effect from that and and and ironically
too when people go into radiation or
chemotherapy in a ketogenic state
whether it's from a ketogenic diet or
just from fasting beforehand you can the
we think there's going to be a greater
enhancement of that therapy you're going
to get a greater output and they're
starting to have the data that really
alludes to that and but also you're
gonna have much fewer side-effects and
that's been measured where you see
number of mouth sores all these effects
from chemo and radiation or diminish
because it's a very powerful powerful
anti inflammatory state to be in
metabolically so so that's kind of you
know the way you look at it from that
basic biology standpoint does this mean
that ordinary people who on a ketogenic
diet not necessarily a clinic be
monitored one but a ketogenic diet are
actually safeguarding themselves against
cancer
you know those experiments will be hard
to do theoretically yeah theoretically
yes and because when we look at we know
that the cancer rates are higher in type
2 diabetics and that's just the
progression of this sort of metabolic
derangement where you lose insulin
sensitivity the ketogenic diet you know
you go back to this state of being not
needing insulin as much and and all
these things what happens when you're on
the ketogenic diet is you kind of
naturally restrict calories and we've
known for a long time the caloric
restriction is you know incredibly
healthy to the whole biology of our of
our of our bodies it extends lifespan
prevents all sort of neuro degeneration
all these things so yeah theoretically
the answer to that would be yes but I
think those studies would you know those
would take a long time to really
that out I think just remembering you
know for our listeners is that we all
have cancer cells floating around enough
whether we have a tumor growing or not
we all have some potential there and so
what I have my patients is cycle even if
it's just a few times a year to get into
a ketogenic state they like it they lose
a little weight and I say potentially
help maybe decrease some replication or
some what we're trying to do is start
out any of those cancer cells and when
you get a PET scan and it lights up
that's just the example and that's the
Warburg effect that Travis was talking
about what do you think it's lighting up
from when they put the sugar into your
vein into the blood it goes to where the
cancer is and that's why it lights up
because cancer sugar we've got to
remember that and know that we can't
make a lot of medical statements or
claims at this point but we know certain
things and so how could it not be
helpful to us in many ways
neurologically cancer weight loss all of
it and I know sandy you had asked me
before the show and and Travis you know
the use of researchers that were we keep
talking about Tom Seyfried in fact I
just talked to dr. Seyfried thirty
minutes ago about this product you know
this process that we're talking about
next week in Colorado I think we'll
bring that up later in the show he's so
excited about it because we're all
looking for ways that we can help
patients now faster and better than we
have but also dr. yonko which is one of
the researchers that you brought up in
your book and now you know I've had the
pleasure of working with the group I
will say from your book that were
sentient wanted to know what was up with
three broke a rebate and I'll just
quickly say and talking with dr. Koh is
that she too with that molecule now has
new research showing that that can be
helpful if you choose chemo and
radiation that can help you lose that
use less of it and be more effective the
same type of ther ways that you were
talking about hyperbaric and ketogenic
diet before if we choose traditional
therapies and if that's the way to go
it's
possible that many of these adjunctive
treatments may help us do better and
have less of the toxic effects of the
chosen therapies and that's exciting to
think that we can go down that route but
also remembering in time with more
research these may be mono therapies
which means they stand alone and we
don't need the rest of it and in society
for integrative oncology this year just
a month ago dr. Andrew Weil stood up at
the front as the keynote lecture and
said to a group of medical oncologists
hundreds in the room he said I think
that in time we're going to look back at
chemo and radiation the same way that we
used to when kids wanted to have their
their mothers wanted to see if their
feet were if their shoes were fitting in
their feet they would x-ray their feet
and we were exposing them to heisting
radiation and we look back and go what
in the world we were thinking and he
said I think we're gonna do the same
thing with chemo and radiation and I
believe that as well but for now well
what was the response to him saying that
you know what these are
integrative Society for integrative
oncology there's a little pushback
there's a little bit of you know the the
hands in front because that's how they
are treating patients now but they are
open to listening and they understand
the mind-body section at least that
they're very open to meditation and to
you know yoga they love that piece but
when we start talking about these other
therapies it's a little more turf
oriented but I applauded him for that
and many in the audience did and that
but remember that's the group of
oncologists that think that there are
other things that play into cancer mind
body wise diet this and that not just
all we have a chemo and radiation yeah
this mind-body you know this is an
emerging research out of that that's
getting really interesting the the new
terms of social genomics and you can
measure people you know one of the
biggest things to our to our health and
happiness is loneliness not being
aloneness
having just a rich
network of support and you can measure
that now genomically that the immune
system will switch to a more
inflammatory profile than people that
report you know being lonely and and
there was a big study where they tracked
over 3,000 women with breast cancer and
those that had really rich networks of
friends and family to help them survived
you know over three years longer than
those are reported having less less of
that so you know all these factors
stress you know cortisol being raised
having support all these things that we
kind of dismiss before our you know you
now we're be able to measure them more
effectively we see that they're really
really important yeah it's all coming
together now isn't it I mean the whole
point of money connection we're really
smooth in the evidence of them and that
particular group Society for integrative
oncology they really get that peace the
stress piece they really do we've got to
educate them more on metabolic therapies
I'm hoping that we're going to get a
lecture on this next year Travis get
ready about it I will say this they let
me talk about homeopathic injections
this year for liver and gallbladder
because they're always saying how do we
keep those going during chemo and
radiation right that's usually many of
the times why they have to stop because
of those that organs shut down and so
they were interested that I had
something natural and had data on it for
these injections so they let me talk
about homeopathy so I really believe we
can get at the metabolic lecture going
you know who you know who doesn't have
the advantage of the knowledge that you
guys have got I look at cancer and I
have a very close relative who's been
fighting cancer and going the the
traditional chemo route and I've
attended many of her appointments with
her and I've heard the doctors say every
time she brings up a question like oh
you know what about high doses of
vitamin C what about this what about
that that I've heard about and all
they'll say is oh that's not in our
protocol we've got no evidence about
that
and they cannot they're not allowed to
even discuss it in certain places I mean
I know that they have to protect the
public and know that there have to be
protocols in place but does it really
have to be such a slow grinding business
man that that's that's such a
psychologically loaded topic sandy I
think you know from my perspective what
I what I see with oncologist is they
they really do have brutally difficult
jobs from this standpoint of complexity
and you know people come in with variety
of cancers each treatment is different
there's multiple ways you can treat each
cancer so I think what happens is the
standard of care is difficult enough and
they just draw that line okay that's my
job and I want to do it well and and I'm
just you know if you start bringing in
supplements and everything else it just
becomes so hard and complex for them
that they almost have to draw that line
so I think some of that comes from that
from that it's just too hard otherwise a
lot of it comes from not being
open-minded you know there's just and
and I don't think that they in many
times they way from the patient's
perspective they're looking at
everything from a risk/reward
perspective okay high dose vitamin C
isn't gonna hurt me could it potentially
help you know that's the way the
patient's looking at and that's all
they're really asking for the input for
that question and that's where I think
they could do better
it's just steering them you know to look
at these things through the lens of
risk/reward in a better way because you
know everybody talks about the dietary
advice it doesn't matter now in college
this will say I'll go eat doughnuts have
it doesn't matter what you eat we hear
that all the time but you know how could
that how could that be the patient's
intuitively know that's not the case and
so they're looking for these answers and
advice from other places and I think in
the end you know we'll need a new branch
we'll need a branch of medical of
metabolic oncology you know to help to
help out and and you look at sort of the
history of Medicine and we always really
emphasize
the self-sufficiency of the doctor the
doctor's intuition above all else what
happened though is the complexity of
medicine is outstripped the human minds
ability to do it effectively alone so we
need systems in place that help
oncologists we need you know adjunctive
therapies we're going to need all these
groups of people to help just because of
the complexity that is that you're
feeling right exactly and that's why
we're bringing together a group of
metabolic to doctor see free yourself me
let's see dominate doctor doctor
D'Agostino dr. Koh dr. Eliot these are
people mentioned in your book and we are
getting together in Colorado next week
for a summit and I was talking to dr.
secret today and you know we all agree
we swim up with our own types of
protocols right now you know I have
oncologists that will say doctor warden
I want to send a patient to you for
vitamin C IV and I'll say okay but what
about the timing and that's what I'm
learning from the researchers from Eliot
from dr. D'Agostino right now Dom just
told me that he's got a research going
right now it's too early to tell but
they're doing a vitamin C IV research
well no and what's more important we'll
know when is it before during after
chemo different therapies when is it
best when can it actually counter
indicate contraindicate so if you're
doing an oxidative therapy you don't
want to do an antioxidant patients
cuddle I just want to take vitamin C
can't that helped my mune system and I
said depends on if we want ox you know
we want to do seek-and-destroy or if
we're in the rebuild so it's all about
timing and that's the beauty and why
we're pulling this group together so
that we can look at each other's
research we can look at the clinical and
say here's the timing because those
open-minded oncologists are saying okay
I'm done I don't know and here just
those feet you know doctor working don't
see Travis at Karen ecology and we and
let them do what they do but it's a lot
of it is about timing and we're we're
getting there
we're really getting there so that's the
exciting piece more time together
yeah it's going to be a process yeah
you're right it's going to be and it's
not going to be one thing it's going to
be a process with timing dosages it's
going to look very different than it did
in the past I'm gonna take a lot of you
know a lot of people and effort and
research and I think you know we have a
group we have some doctors in LA at
cedars-sinai that are considering
opening a clinic a metabolic type clinic
you know adjunctive clinic in that area
that are just tired of seeing people die
and it's coming from a place of you know
what we just want to do better and
what's it going to look like so it
depends on the individual you know I
think that there there's a lot of open
minded oncologists out there that are
that are you know ready for something
like this going arms truth in Medicine
Show
I'm sandy said bare and this month dr.
Denise warden and I are speaking with
science researcher Travis Kristofferson
about his book tripping over the truth
which explores the new metabolic theory
of cancer we'll be back with more after
this break
[Music]
the cutting edge of conscious radio on
times radio I own FM being a radio host
on IOM FM allows you to build your show
on a rich platform with the power of the
Internet to fulfill your outreach goals
and connect with a very specialized and
global online audience unlimited by time
and distance on x radio will provide you
with web relevance a recognizable
conscious brand and with the standard of
excellence that has accompanied every
single ometimes endeavor host your show
with ometimes radio network my name is
Victor Furman some call me of the voice
I've always been fascinated with human
nature spirituality science and the
crossroads at which they meet join me
Wednesdays at 8 p.m. Eastern on
ometimes radio and we'll explore these
topics and so much more on destination
unlimited it only takes a minute to find
out if you may have prediabetes
and you can do it at do I have
pre-diabetes or you're probably not
going to are you kids work listening the
radio you're busy which is great because
busy people can't get pre-diabetes oh my
I read that wrong they can so visit do I
have pre-diabetes org and take a short
test because pre-diabetes
can be reversed brought to you by the Ad
Council and it's free diabetes awareness
partners
[Music]
welcome back
Travis dr. Deniz tell me more about
what's happening in Colorado it sounds
really exciting and incredibly hopeful I
am so excited about it and I think all
of us that will be there are excited
about it because we really want to
realize this dream of a foundation in
Travis out foundations everybody's got a
little bit of large foundation where
we're collecting monies for research on
these metabolic therapies but also a
clinic where we can actually start the
therapies instead of right now when
patients call me or they they talk to me
then I have to find a hyperbaric
somewhere near them I have to find a
doctor that's willing to do this that's
fine somebody help me - Jenni will have
an area where they come and they stay
and they heal and they can do the
therapies learn it and do it so a human
center also a research center because a
lot of the alternative places are a
clinics they say we can heal you will do
vitamin C I they're not collecting the
data and that is not the way it should
be done we really want to do it
correctly scientifically collect the
data and do everything by the book so to
speak but open it out what we can start
helping people and we want to realize
the dream with tremendous talent so if
you read Travis's book and you read the
people in the book there's a few people
outside of the but now because they've
come along since then but they are going
to be part of this summit we're going to
sit in a room we're going to be together
for three days and we want to come with
creative ways to collaborate with one
another with the universities with the
researchers to bring this forward so
it's very exciting and I'm just so
appreciative that all the researchers
are coming and I I talked to dr. C freed
me so well you know usually you start
with the clinicians or you start with
this or that that's it no where do you
think we get our ideas where do you
think that you know we are getting our
protocols it comes from the researchers
and so I this whole concept is starting
with the researchers in the metabolic
Theory
getting them together how do we support
them and how do we push this forward and
we already have entrepreneurs on board
we've got people who want to fund it's
going to push it faster than it could
have gone individually with those of us
just help patients one at a time you
know with their particular cancer so I'm
very excited and we know the problem we
have some solutions and when we put our
heads together with this tremendous
talent with the intent of individualized
medicine one person not just a protocol
everybody gets the same thing no what
does that patient need in that moment
and we all by the way understand that
and believe that all the researchers and
everybody that's going to be there so we
were ready to play big it with
luminaries to bring this forward so
about a new car you follow me yeah can
you clarify for me this is a research
center is it also a treatment center yes
it is both it'll be right now we're
believing that the research part will be
a nonprofit that funds the research
portion of this but it will be a
clinical patients come to have treatment
not only that they will be able to stay
at the destination in a beautiful
beautiful area where they can come and
we're doing the mind-body therapies
we're helping them with that stress
we're helping them with those pieces not
just the physical therapies that need to
go on to help them as well and above all
else helping them make their decisions
in the right mindset out of fear out of
her eNOS what are their options and how
do they make their decisions on how they
want to treat their disease Wow so
that's pretty revolutionary it is I mean
everybody's doing on a small level every
physician that wants to do this let me
try there's a wonderful care oncology
has brought their therapies here and
I've referred patients to Travis this
group when they have certain types of
cancer I say you know what this is where
I think you need to go they're going to
do chemo radiation and they may fit
within Travis's protocol right that what
they have going on there's others that
have been
lose from the system we don't know we
could do or others that say I don't want
to do that or they say what can I do in
conjunction haven't you one patient at a
time try to take them through and help
them and I'm doing it but this is going
to be big we can help many many people
and all the researchers and travelers
you do to you guys get calls you're not
clinician so you can't treat them so
you're getting all these calls for where
do we get these therapies and so this
will be a place where they can we can
help them more of them and I can one at
a time find where they need to be and
how they need help and where they should
be going yeah it's always been pieced
together you're right you know you've
learned about the diet here you have to
figure out where to get hyperbaric
oxygen if you want to do that and all
these things and then that the turkey
model the the it's called chemo thermia
in Istanbul they really put it together
in one spot and then we see the potency
of that and that's the first iteration
of this we know that this can be
approved upon and that's the model sort
of going forward you know it's difficult
because the traditional ways to measure
one therapy the time we're going to be
looking at what it rationally designed
combinations and then measuring the
outcome and we know we have to do this
if we're really going to beat this
disease it's the model that has to be
adopted so it's you know it's it's a
beautiful model it's exciting to be part
of it so and it's not just one treatment
sandy right it's not one tree yeah it's
going to be a combination treatments
individualized and when you get the
these mines together with their research
with their different therapies than we
and and Tom and I dr. C pre and I were
talking about it today we'll figure this
out we're going to know exactly what to
do right now we're doing the best that
we can is doing it at the basis of all
of it or is that only one part of it you
know I think a really good sort of
baseline paper to go off as the one
Dominic D'Agostino and Tom Seyfried Road
and it's they sort of they call the
therapy press pulse and yeah the
foundational therapy is kind of the
ketogenic diet and it you know it
- in this physiological state where then
you can start you can you can sort of
manipulate it from that point and then
you once the the the cancer cells are
stressed then you add in pulses and the
pulse can be in the form of hyperbaric
oxygen where mmm it's it's like
radiation it does it kills cancer cells
in the same way
radiation is what call ionizing
radiation so it splits water molecules
creates free radicals and then that's
what kills the cancer cells hyperbaric
oxygen is just a much more mild form of
that generation of free radicals so
those are the pulses but you do them
intermittently you do that through
timing and and you know you importantly
you do it so it's not it's not
extraordinarily caustic to the patient
that you know
well it sounds utopian to say it and I
have no doubt we'll get there we always
tend to judge things you know in our
little blink of an eye we're not here
very long and these things take a long
time but we will get to the point where
cancer therapies where you come out
healthier on the other side we actually
say it's it's a therapeutic process and
you know it's gonna take time to get
there but this is the start of that this
is sort of the theoretical foundation of
what that will look like Travis before
the show remember we were talking to
same therapies that we're talking about
that are going to help with cancer and
neurological diseases it is anti-aging
it's the same processes that we're
dealing with when we figured these
pieces out and we get better at it that
is anti-aging it's not just anti-cancer
yeah yeah I I firmly believe yeah the
best cancer therapies will be anti-aging
therapies but when you look at the when
you look at the process of aging it's
this you know we see these very defined
epigenetic changes and I can look at we
can a researcher can take your cells
anybody's cells and analyze the
epigenetic patterns what we call the
methylation patterns and tell you your
biological age within two years and it's
probably a better a better you know a
more accurate depiction of your true age
than your than your chronological age so
that's how accurate it is so we see what
is called
you see this these changes in your
epigenome over time when you look at a
cancer cell it looks like a 300 year old
cell it's just it's like it's on Aging
and hyperdrive so the same sort of
processes that cause aging are like put
on you know fast forward and cancer
cells and the way we reverse aging and
you can reverse aging in a petri dish
it's called stem cell induction and you
change you sort of reset or reboot the
epigenome back to biological age zero
and we can do that now in the lab and
these same therapies that do that also
tend to be anti-cancer therapies and so
you'll be able to reset the genome you
know back to this normalized state the
cancer cells which is also a D aging
state so yeah those those two therapies
they overlap and I think you know in the
end it'll be one of the same and we have
focused a lot on cancer but of course
restricted ketogenic diet is good for
all kinds of neurological diseases like
outside of as ALS brain trauma etc
that's very very correct ketone bodies
are strangely therapeutic the neurons
your brain just loves ketone bodies and
and even even something like traumatic
brain injury so you can measure that
when you win when my sir and ketone
bodies and then they undergo traumatic
brain injury it's a horrible experiment
but it's lessened by the ketone bodies
and so you know I think every NFL
football player should take in the
exaggerator's ketone before a game but
yeah they're incredibly incredibly um
yeah they're incredibly uh sort of
restorative for neurons so you know that
bring that brings up we had a talk about
the research center they you know people
were saying were they're going to be my
studies are going to be their format and
I told them I said there's a way of
researching in a beautiful way like
Yonko they're hope research when she was
explaining how she treats her mice and
it was in travellers book too so kind of
like pet since we talked to them she
sees them herself and she says I'm going
to make you sick but then I'm going to
make you better so there is you know
there is
a beautiful thought that they are
contributing their respected their loved
and there will be no animal cruelty I
think there's a difference between
animal research and animal cruelty and I
think we've got a better education on
that people and many people will be very
happy to hear that and I hope I'm not
going off piste here but we've talked a
lot about the ketogenic diet there's a
lot of products around that can
instantly you know create ketosis
powders that you can take etc are they
as effective is actually doing the
dieters itself mm-hmm that's a great
question sandy and my you know that'll
take a that'll take time to figure that
out I would say that intuitively no I
think that the benefit you get from the
ketogenic diet is a lot of it is because
you sort of when you eat a high fat diet
like that it changes the sort of there's
there's factors that come into play that
we suppress appetite so you sort of
naturally caloric restrict and so some
of the benefit may not just be from the
ketone bodies by themselves but from
this sort of calorically restricted
state that you're in and and who knows I
mean we try to we try to figure out
these mechanisms and extrapolate outward
and predict biology but we're so complex
that you know it's it's so difficult to
do that we know that these caloric
restriction methods work and they're
incredibly restorative and that's kind
of the fundamental basis behind the
ketogenic diet sandy I'll say some of
those products some patients because of
their blood sugar because of other
things in their stress levels it's hard
for them to get into ketosis as high as
we'd like for them to be so that's where
sometimes those can be aid to help but
I'm with Travis you need the high fat
there's other things that go along with
the caloric restriction but I think the
diet is the best but I think we'll get
better and I know
D'Agostino is going beyond a ketone
salts going into esters I think we're
going to have some aids that help us but
we can't ever get past the fact that our
diet we are what we eat
we are and and that food is critical and
it won't be just a product that we take
and if we can eat whatever we want well
we're almost out of time now
one last question as people who are at
the edge of this cutting edge research
and breakthrough and these protocols etc
are you glimpsing some potentials for
other things that could come out of this
that you haven't mentioned that you're
not necessarily focusing on right now
but give cause for great excitement oh
man do you want me to take that
yeah go ahead very very brief but yeah
just what I touched on earlier you know
we can we can take a ninety-year-old
skin cell and add a combination of small
molecules now and turn that cell into a
stem cell and then turn it back into a
skin stops skin cell and that biological
round trip will completely be aged it
from a nine year old cell to to
biological age zero so it's entirely
restored mitochondrial function is
brand-new telomeres lengthened and and I
there's no reason to think that we won't
be someday to be able to do that in vivo
and sort of restore our stem cell
population so I know it sounds science
fiction like but that the basic science
is there and it's easy to extrapolate
that outward yeah that means any and all
things Andy any and I sign up to be your
guinea pig
[Laughter]
we've got a new as I will say and Travis
ever talk to you about it yet in
Caroline when we're starting to do some
types of things like that just to see
what we see but we think we're pretty
excited about it so we want to look as
good as we feel and we want to slow down
the aging process so that now as
spiritual wonderful things that we
our that we can do the work that we are
here to do and not be sick and not have
our lives cut short but to be able to to
to do the work the good work for the
humanity and be able to do it so that
that's the big purpose here it's not
just ya look good and feel good that we
really we've got work to do thank you
for joining this tonight thank you for
writing the book I tell you it's really
one of the most exciting reads that I've
had in a long time and I encourage
everybody to get it so good luck and
come back and tell us in it about the
next step I look forward to it thank you
okay well tripping over the truth the
metabolic theory of cancer is available
on Amazon and can be ordered at your
local bookstore for more information on
the topics discussed tonight visit w-w-w
dot find a shenzhen for metabolic cancer
therapies calm I'm sandy search beer and
I'm dr. Donna Gordon thank you for
joining us we'll be back next month
[Music]
you